
>Newton’s first law: 
if a body is at rest or moving at a constant speed in a straight line,
it will remain at rest or keep moving in a straight line at constant speed 
unless it is acted upon by a force.

>Newton's second law:
F=ma

>Newton's third law:Newton’s third law states that when two bodies interact, they apply forces to one another that are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.


Atwood Machines:
Hang a pully with two weights attached to strings on both sides.
Weights have different masses. 
What is the acceleration of this sytem??

Atwood Machine Lab activity:
1. how does theoritical acceleratoin differ from measured acceleration? calculate percentage error ((measured-calc)/calculated)*100

2. what could account for any difference?

3. can you use an Atwood machine to calculate an unknown mass?

moving in a circle applies force.

Copernicus
polish astronomer. said system works better when sun is center of the earth.
Kepler took brahe's data and said heliocentrism made more sense.
Keplar's law: the orbit of a planet/comet about the sun is an ellipse with the sun's center of mass at one focus.
2: A line joining the planet/comet and the sun sweeps out equal areas in equal intervals of time.
Newton said the net force on a planet must vary inversely with the square of the distance between the planet and the sun.

F=G(m*m(2))/r^2
r=radius between objects
G is the universal constant
G=6.67259*10^-11


Newtonian Physics/Classical Physics
-newtons physics described the world using forces acting on object
-called classical mechanics or newtonian mechanics
-runs into problems when describing
	-very massive objects (Black holes, etc.)
	-very small distances (smaller than an atom-plank length)
	-very high speeds (approaching and at speed of light)

Forces are useful tools, but 'spooky' as a science
-how does gravity pull something at a distance?

Modern Physics- Einstein

His ideas=

Special and General relativity
Gravity as curved spacetime
E=mc^2
E=energy
m=mass
e=speed of light

Relativity:
whats the difference between floating and falling?
-depends on inertial frame of reference
-called intertial reference in relativity.

physics appears the same only if you have the same frame of reference. 

mass curves spacetime, but anything moving follows curve
including light, which does not have mass

Black holes
-very dense mass can create extremely deep gravity "well"
-singularity
-event horizon is what you see

Momentum and Impulse
(apply what we know about forces to analyze new kids of problems)

Rearrange Newton's 2nd Law
Forces cause acceleration
F(net)=ma
Acceleration is change in velocity over time

rewrite:
F(net)*t=m*(change in)v

Impulse: Force applied over a period of time
J=F(net)*t

Momentum: inertia in motion
p=mv

What is momentum:
-property of and object related to its mass and velocity
-"mass in motion" or "inertia in motion"

Inertia: the ability of something to keep moving.

p= momentum (vector)
p= mv
m= mass(kg)
v= velocity (m/s, vector)

unit of momentum is kg(m/s)

if an object is not moving, it has no momentum.

Impulse: a force applied for a period of time

J=Impulse
J=F(net)t
J=(delta)p
F(net)t=(delta)p
N*s=kg(m/s)

Understanding check.
1. because hitting the hay stack allows you to slow down over a longer amount of time and with less force.

2. so that they don't hurt themselves, so the ball has more time to slow down.


Momentum of a system!
-sum of the momentums of all objects in a the system

equation: P(total)= m1v2+m2v2+m3v3+...

REMEMBER!
Newton's 3rd Law
During collision, each object applies equal and opposite forces

J1=-J1
(delta)p1=-(delta)p2
(delta)p(total)=0

Impulse and change in momentum are also equal and opposite.
these changes cancel, so momentum stays unchanched.

Momentum is conserved within a system!
total momentum of all objects before interaction equals total momentum of all objects after the interaction.

total momentum stays the same, but individuals can change, "transfer" between them.


WORK::::::::::::::

Work is a force applies over a distance.
To do work, something must be moved.

Formulas:
Work= f*d

Work ==> newton/meter

work is measured in joules (J)


Power:
How quickly you can do work

power = world/time
Joules per second
unit is watts

ENERGY:::::::::::::

Why do objects fall according to Newton? A force was applied

Why do objects bounce? Newton had trouble answering this.

Energy is the answer!
Energy: Describes the ability to cause change or to do work
with energy, we can say objects gain energy as they fall, and because they still have energy when they hit the ground, 
they bounce.

Kinetic Energy:
-Energy of Motion
-Makes stuff move

Potential Energy:
-Stored energy
-Can be converted to kinetic energy
-many different types
-Gravitational PE: energy from being in a gravitiational field.

Energy is always measured in JOULES (J)
Kinetic Energy = 1/2 mv^2
Potential Energy = mgh
h = height

Total energy is mechanical energy, which is always constant

Mechanical energy = potential + kinetic energy

PE + KE = PE(final) + KE(final)


SRQ Energy

1. The ball's kinetic energy is 0.00441 J.

2. The book's initial speed was 0.42 m/s.

3. The gravitational potential energy is 0.062 J

4.

	a. kinetic energy.

	b. thermal energy is involved with heating water.

	c. throwing a football involves mechanical, kinetic, potential energy.

	d. mechanical and elastic potential energy.

5. mechanical energy is the sum of kinetic and potential energy, and 
non\-mechanical energy is any energy that is not mechanical energy. This
includes nuclear, chemical, internal, and electrical.  Kinetic energy 
is the energy of an object due to it's motion, while potential energy
is the energy that an object has due to it's position, charge, stresses, or 
other objects. Gravitational potential energy is the enery an object has
because of it's position relative to other objects with high gravity, and 
elastic potential energy is the energy that exists in a deformed elastic
object.

SRQ Conservation of Energy

1. If the spring of a jack-in-the-box is compressed a distance of 8.00 cm 
from its relaxed length and then released, what is the speed of the toy head 
when the spring returns to its natural length? Assume the mass of the toy head 
is 50.0 g, the spring constant is 80.0 Nim, and the toy head moves only in the 
vertical direction. Also disregard the mass of the spring. 
(Hint: Remember that there are two forms of potential energy in the problem.) 

1. The toy head will be moving at 3.2 m/s.

2. No, because if the second hill is higher, even without friction the 
roller coaster could never go over the second hill. This is because of the 
law of conservation of energy.

3. 

	a. Yes, it is likely to hold.

	b. No, mechanical energy is likely to be lost to heat due to friction
	with the carpet.

	c. No, mechanical energy will likely be lost to heat because of friction
	with the air.

4. The machine transfers its energy from potential to kinetic, and sometimes back 
again as the balls rise or fall. They lose energy to friction, and so must carry
the balls back up to the top with outside energy.

E04 Thermodynamics

The four first basic concepts of thermodynamics:
Thermal energy: thermal energy is a form of kinetic energy that applies to particles

Heat: how quickly particles are moving

Temperature: measure of heat

Measuring Scale: kelvin (k) celsius (c)

absolute zero is -273.15 (c)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Work and Machines

Machines use a force to do useful work
 - they can redirect forces to do work
 - they can change the distance/force between their input/output
 - they can tranform one type of energy to another

Measuring work and  power:
 Machines do work
 W=fd
 F=w/t

work input and output
in a perfect machine the input would equal the output

mechanical advantage is the input distance over output distance,
actual MA is measured output force over measured input force

Efficiency is a measure of output work/energy over input work/energy

Six simple machines:
pulley, lever, wheel and axle, wedge, inclined plane, screw.

multiple simple machines together make a complex machines.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Engineering
using science to build machines and technology
engineering: project-based, applied science
- engineers develop technology to solve problems or do work
- engineers develop technology to create more science and engineering


Engineering design process:
1. define the problem
2. identiy constraints on resources
3. brainstorm solutions for problem
4. select best solutions
5. prototype solutions
6. test solutions
7. iterate to improve prototype
8. communicate the solution

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Trebuchet project notes:
stand, swing arm, and fulcrum are the basics of the structure

swing arm has weight at one and and sling at the other
ratio of long to short arm is 3.75 to 1
sling is the same length as long arm
sling sits underneath the trebuchet. gaurd rail? lubrication?
weight shouldn't be stopped
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Putting energy to work
work is an force applied over a distance
distance can be measured
force is mass times acceleration
measuring acceleration is difficult
THERE IS A BETTER WAY

work energy theorum:
-work moves an object
-kinetic energy describes motion of an object
-so, total KE = Total work

thermal energy lost to Heat

PE(in) = KE(out) +The
work that you put into the machine is transferred to kinetic energy out and heat
Efficiency is how well machine uses stored enrgy for work

Efficiency = (W out/ W) * 100

stuff to do for grade

b level: test machine and measure the criteria
calculate work done and Efficiency
Potential Energy(in) = Kinetic Energy(out) +Thermal Energy
Efficiency = (W out/ W) * 10

PE = mass * gravity * height
KE = 1/2 mass * velocity^2

energy is work plus heat 

at absolute zero there is no entropy
absolute zero is impossible

ENTROPY:
a measure of disorder
particles move in different ways, al the ways they move decreases work machine does
particles spin wobble vibrate heat rotate
entropy always increases
total useful energy for work goes down, and disordered states increases.

heat death of the universe:
1. universe is a closed system
2. entropy of a closed system always increases
conclusion: the universe is moving towards a state of maximum entropy
all objects in the universe will be equally distributed through all energetic forms
there would be no time 

the arrow of time:

most processes in physics are reversable or symmetriical, mathematically, they look the same forwards and backwards
ex. movement, collisions, energy changes

time only seems to move in one direction, unlike most processes
living things and particles increase entropy 

time only goes in one direction because of entropy, which is a one-way, irreversible process
that causes events to move in a single direction

rule one: you can't win
rule two: you can't time
rule three: you have to play

ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM AND LIGHT

Electromagnetic Spectrum:

Transverse waves: up and down

-Transverse waves of fluctuating electric and magnetic fields
-Do not require a medium (not mechanical waves)
	-can travel through space
	
c= the speed of light in a vacuum
speed of light - 2.99*10^8 m/s
speed of light is the fastest anything can go in the universe
light is organized by frequency and wavelengths
light is created by accelerating charges
a photon of light generates an electrical field and a magnetic field

microwaves, xrays, gamma rays, uv, infrared, all light
visible spectrum is much smaller than total light that exists

lower frequency, higher wavelength is used for communication

RADIO, MICRO, AND INFRARED WAVES

-long wavelength and low frequency
-radio waves are not sound waves, they are frequencies of light
-used for radios, television, cell phones
-infrared waves are used for tv remotes, night vision, garage remotes

ULTRAVIOLET, X AND GAMMA RAYS

-shortest wavelength, highest frequency
-cause damage to human cells, because wavelength is closer to atomic size
-ultraviolet causes sun burns. comes from sun naturally.
-x-rays - used to detect bone damage, baggage screening at airports
-gamma - comes from radioactive decay. usually high energy. cosmic rays
do u know which bone gets bigger in the body?

VISIBLE LIGHT
-only part of the spectrum that human eyes can detect
-red is longest wavelength, lowest frequency people can see
-violet is smallest wavelength, highest frequency people can see
use v = frequency times wavelength to find wavelength, when frequency is given or frequency when wavelength is gived.


light sources vs illuminated sources
-light sources are: stars, light bulbs, flames
-take in or use energy to create light
-most objects that you see are illuminated
-people, plants, rocks all reflect light, don't create it

CHARACTERISTICS OF LIGHT WAVES

-intensity(brightness) = amplitude
-color = frequency
	-order of colours = spectrum
	- primary colours of light - red green blue
	- red light + green + blue = white
	- different from pigment colours
	
light has three primary colours which can be detected by eye's light cones

speed of light in a vacuum is the speed of the entire electromagnetic spectrum
light changes speed in different mediums
speed of light in any material depends on optical density((ability of a material to transmit light)
  greater the optical density, the more light slows
  air c/1.003
  water c/1.33
  diamond c/2.42

LIGHT
is it a particle or a wave?
it acts like a particle and a wave depending on the situation

representing light waves:
it is impossible to see actual wave shape of light wave
light waves are represented as straight lines, called rays, that show direction and path of light
use arrowheads
incident when incoming, reflected when bouncing back
refracted when transmitted in a new direction
direction of ray is indicated by angle from a line perpendicular to surface the light hits
perpendicular line is called normal line 

law of reflection: the incident ray, reflected ray, and normal to the surface at any point of incidence are in the same plane.
the angle of reflection is equal to angle of incidence.